ai rules for deisgn.
ai does the code. I do the direction.
for this to fit I have to visualize the math in my mind.
I need to see the math I use for any of the visuals and node interactions.
they must be few and simple.
I can visualize polar and addition and subtraction.
I can visualize pan, zoom, rotation.
It is very hard to visualize radicals trig, formulas with squarse, matricies.
this means cartesian and quaterians are rejected.

ai rules for usage:
minimze ai usage maximize the design value per token.

visual rules.
the visuals need to be in 3d because that is how I visualize.
the visuals must be clear what is changing when.
for this to map to a single number there must be invariants
that hold no matter what node I drag.
distance invariance, angular invariance, animation invariance.
distance invariance:
    there are certain subgraph regions where the edge lengths must stay the same as other edge lengths
    reguardless of node dragging.
there are certaint subgraph regiouns where the angles between edges must stay constrainted
    reguardless of node dragging.
animation invariance:
    the animation has to run at a certain speed for every single node that I can view
    reguardless of node dragging.
    I must be able to control the speed to make it faster or slower or stop at any time in the animation.

there is 1 network.

input:
1,0 as visual beads with color asignments. 2 values for animation signals is for simplicity.
nodes:
    1 node 1 animation job.
node kinds:
    input node:
        send input to time and pulse nodes.
    time nodes:
        represent tick marks on a number line because of what they do.
    selection nodes:
        represent edge selection for detecting the start and end of a stream of input.
        for 010, the edges are "01", "01"
    pulse nodes:
        send pulses consistently to selection node.
        time nodes already have a role.
        selecton nodes already have a role.
        input nodes already have a role.
    

    future nodes:
        "and gate" node:
            this node gets 11 from the selection nodes and is what represents the number stream as a whole.
            example: input is 010. it acts as 1 to nodes it will connect with.
            exmaple input is 0110 or 01010. it acts as 2 to nodes it will connect to.
        moving "and gate" node.
            summary: it follows the input and links 2 different hierarchies by the same timing distance.
            description: has 2 input channels. 1 connected to 1 hierarchy and 1 connected to another hierarchy.
            the input channels moves at the same cadence as the time nodes.
            needs to start at the node that connects hierarchy level 1 to hierachy level 2 in the same hierarchy
            each time it moves it sends a 1 to the selection
            when the node gets 11 it locks to a postion where the input channels can't move.
            for the current example it would lock itself 1's level 2 at "time node" 2 with 2's level 2 at "time node" 1.
            it could be moved by a wiring node to be with a "hierarchy" node as a "long term location"
        wiring node:
            this node alters connections in other nodes in certain ways.

future vision:
    - work with more than 1 and 2. any number from 1-10 should work.
    - addition.
    - subtraction,
    - division.
    - lateral cross hierarchy and gate trees for conencting different arithmatic strucures for more uses of "=".
    - 2d input and geographical represenation. currently this runs on a 1d input stream. all the things correcntly interpret a 1d world.
    - time delay proxy nodes for the delta and gates.
    - the delta and gates let different numbers to be seen as the same for flexible future grouping work. part of setting up for set theory.